Foundations of Game Engine Development Volume 1 Mathematics Notes

Chapter 1:

Scalar:
A scalar is a quantity such as distance, mass, or time that can be fully described using a single numerical value representing its size, or its magnitude.

Vector:
A vector is a quantity that carries enough information to represent a direction in space in addition to a magnitude.

Example of a vector:
1) The velocity of a projectile at a particular instant is given by both its speed (the magnitude) and the direction in which it is currently travelling.
2) A force acting on an object is represented by both its strength (the magnitude) and the direction in which it is applied.
3) vector = (1,2,3)

In n dimensions, a direction and magnitude are described by n numerical coordinates, and these are called the components of a vector.

So in,
vector = (1,2,3)
1,2,3 are the components of a vector.

Using the Cartesian coordinates, 1,2, and 3 will be x, y, and z in 3-dimensional space.

In two-dimensional space we do not have a z component.

Four-dimensional space is a setting in which a great deal of mathematics is done in the course of game engine development.
Instead of only x, y, and z coordinates we have x, y, z, and w.

The fourth component w is sometimes called a "weight" value.

Vectors are represented as a line segment having an arrowhead at one end.
The length of the line segment is the vectors magnitude, and the arrowhead represents the direction.

To calculate the magnitude of 3-dimensional vector we use Pythagoras theorem:

v = sqrt(vx^2, vy^2, vz^2)

The magnitude of a vector can be changed by multiplying it by a scalar value.

Scalar multiplication produces a vector with a new magnitude but with a direction that is parallel to the original vector.

When the scalar is positive, the new vector still points in the same direction as the original.
But when the scalar is negative, the new vector points in the opposite direction.

A vector that has a magnitude of one is called a unit vector.
The process of setting a vectors magnitude by to one is called normalization.
Unit vectors are important because they are able to provide directional information without a magnitude when a meaningful size is not necessary.

Any nonzero vector can be turned into a unit vector by dividing it by its magnitude.

vector properties:

s and t are scalars
a and b are vectors

(a + b) + c = a + b (b + c) - Associative law for vector addition
a + b = b + a - Commutative law for vector addition
(st)a = s(ta) - Associative law for scalar-vector multiplication
ta = at - Commutative law for scalar-vector multiplication
t(a+b) = ta + tb - Distributive law for scalar-vector multiplication
(s + t)a = sa + ta - Distributive law for scalar-vector multiplication



